---
title: 2020 in review
date: 2020-12-31
layout: post
excerpt: "In 2020 I turned 31 years old."
tags:
- yearly-review
---

In 2020 I turned 31 years old.

I lived through a pandemic. I worked from home starting in March, and still
haven't been back to my office --- I have a pair of sneakers and some teas at my
workstation that I need to collect. I'm considered high risk for COVID as
I'm taking immunosuppressants, so I've spent most of the year in my house. I've
tried to get outdoors but I don't get out as often as I'd like. I have groceries
delivered from Whole Foods now. I haven't seen my parents in person since
Christmas of 2019.

But I haven't gotten sick, and neither has Jami, nor anyone else in my family. I
kept my job, and we've been fortunate not to have suffered financially. And I've
found that I excel at working from home --- I'm more productive, and, without a
commute, have more time to take care of myself, eat well, and work on my own
projects and hobbies. And I've only put gas in my car maybe half a dozen times.

Numbers died suddenly and unexpectedly in April. I grieved for a long time
afterwards. I've had other pets die before, but Numbers was the first pet I
adopted, myself, who died.

We adopted Bobby at the end of May.

I kept up my blog and posted something every month except for June.

I created public-notes.muumu.us[^1].

I took on more responsibility at work after my manager and some more senior
engineers left. Spent a lot of time working on ECS autoscaling, which was a great
success this holiday season.

I built a PC for the first time in a decade, and then built a second one so Jami
and I could play games together and with friends. Not much has changed there in
the last decade, really.

I tried, unsuccessfully, to taper off Remicade.

In the spring I started doing yoga following videos on YouTube and
doyogawithme.com. I stopped some time in the summer but picked it back up again
in October, following a more structured practice which closely follows *A
Systematic Course in the Ancient Tantric Techniques of Yoga and Kriya* by Swami
Satyananda Saraswati, and have done some form of yoga almost every day since.
I'm paying more attention to pranayama and the meditative aspects this time
around after reading a study on participants' abilities to modulate their immune
responses following Wim Hof's techniques. Wim Hof's technique seems, to me, to
largely follow yogic and pranayamic methods, supplemented with cold exposure. It
may be helpful the next time I try to taper off Remicade.

I started listening to records again. I had a good-sized record collection in
college, but slowly sold most of it off with each move, not wanting to lug them
all with me. I didn't even have my record player set up at my current apartment
until the spring of this year, when I pulled it out of the basement and set it
up in my office so I could listen to records while working from home. I
installed a new Ortofon cartridge because I couldn't find a replacement stylus
for my old Shure cartridge and I set it up following Vinyl TV's [*Very Detailed
Turntable Setup for Beginners*](https://youtu.be/WM-aIDwfrhc "YouTube - Vinyl
TV - Very Detailed Turntable Setup for Beginners"). I bought several records ---
original pressings of Kraftwerk's *Computer World* and *The Man Machine* (the
latter of which I formerly owned, but sold several years ago) after Florian
Schneider's death in April; Stephen Malkmus's new *Traditional Techniques*;
Destroyer's new *Have We Met*; *PITH* by Melkbelly; Dan Deacon's soundtrack to
*Well Groomed*; and *The Microphones in 2020*. Jami's mom gave me a repress of
*Fear of Music* for Christmas.

I made [nmfbot](https://github.com/kylerjohnston/nmfbot "GitHub -
kylerjohnston/nmfbot") to help me find new music. It creates a Spotify playlist
of the most popular tracks from the r/indieheads subreddit's weekly "New Music
Friday" thread. I wanted to find new artists to support and buy records from.
After a month or so I realized I didn't like most current indie music, and that
sifting through the playlist was a chore. Still, I did find Melkbelly's *PITH*
through it, and I've come to love that record.

I unsuccessfully tried building a split mechanical keyboard. Twice. I've learned
I am not very good at soldering. Or maybe the $10 soldering iron I got off
Amazon wasn't the best fit for the job. I ended up buying a Microsoft Sculpt
keyboard.

I fixed a broken lid switch on my washing machine and replaced the kitchen
faucet.

I started reading (new) fiction again. And science fiction at that.
*Neuromancer*, *Snow Crash*, and *The Difference Engine* all shaped my literary
tastes and understanding of the world when I was a kid; but as I studied
literature in college my tastes broadened and then narrowed in a new direction,
to the point that I stopped reading science fiction (and eventually stopped
reading things published in the last century or two). But this year I picked up
*Killing Commendatore* by Murakami, and read the sci-fi classics *Dune* and *The
Dispossessed* for the first time.

I decided at the beginning of the year that I would only focus on learning
things and tackling personal projects that I had an immediate interest in. If I
was bored or stuck on something, or had some other project on my mind, I would
find ways to procrastinate and not make progress.

I started the year reading David Black's *Well-Grounded Rubyist*. I read it
cover to cover. I've always been intrigued by Ruby because it seemed so clever
and playful. I came to love Ruby's expressiveness, but, I will say, by the end
of 2020 I generally still reach for Python first just because it's more widely
used --- there are more, and generally better, libraries available, it's more
likely someone else will have tackled a similar problem already, and it's more
likely my teammates or future collaborators will be able to work on it easily
(only one other person on my team is comfortable with Ruby). I do love Ruby, but
in some ways I wish I had spent that effort learning a language that was more
distinct from Python, the other language I know well, like a Lisp or Haskell, or
Rust or C.

I immediately followed *The Well-Grounded Rubyist* with Sandi Metz's *Practical
Object-Oriented Design in Ruby* which was the best introduction to
object-oriented programming I've read, and really made the concepts click in a
way they hadn't before.

Some weekend over the summer I decided to learn Django since that's the
framework our applications use at work and I've only ever worked with Flask
personally before. I liked Django. This was the first time I ever worked with a
"batteries included" framework, coming from Flask, and it really made most
common things seem super easy. I made a small little journaling app that I was
going to use to track my health and Behcet's symptoms. I did use it for a little
while, but ended up just recording that stuff in a Google Calendar, which was
simpler (and cheaper) to maintain. I also made
[is_authenticated](https://github.com/kylerjohnston/is_authenticated "GitHub -
kylerjohnston/is_authenticated"), a *really* simple authentication service to
put in front of public-notes.

While building and using public-notes, I started finding lots of little things
I'd want to improve in TiddlyWiki. I wanted to try to write a clone of it. At
some point I read about Phoenix LiveView, and thought it sounded like a good
tool to use for that project. At another point I watched Saša Jurić's talk [*The
Soul of Erlang and Elixir*](https://youtu.be/JvBT4XBdoUE "YouTube - GOTO 2019 -
The Soul of Erlang and Elixir") and was amazed at this brilliant technology. I
bought a copy of Dave Thomas's *Programming Elixir* and started working through
it. Functional programming, which I had seen only glimpses of before through
Ruby's `reduce`, `map`, `filter` functions and the first chapter of *SICP*, blew
my mind; pattern matching completely changed the way I approached many problems.
My progress with learning Elixir has slowed lately because my interest in
writing web applications has been waning, and it doesn't seem as useful for
other applications. I've dropped it and, instead, have been working through
*Composing Programs*, a re-imagining of *SICP* in Python, the past couple weeks.

## And what of 2021?

Jami has a job in her field now so we're ready to start looking for a place to
actually settle into. I have lots of plans for my house --- this might turn into
a DIY bespoke home automation blog next year.

I *do* want to keep posting at least once a month here. Writing is an excellent
way to synthesize and clarify thoughts, and this blog is a good motivator to do
it.

I want to take a more structured approach to learning next year, and try to work
through topics in the [Teach Yourself Computer
Science](https://teachyourselfcs.com/ "Teach Yourself Computer Science") and
[OSSU Computer Science](https://github.com/ossu/computer-science "GitHub -
ossu/computer-science") curriculums. I think my approach this year, of just
learning and working on whatever I feel like in the moment, led me to pick up
things that aren't necessarily the most useful, and also led to me spending too
much time scrolling through Hacker News to find some newer, cooler thing to
learn. I had fun, but I think I can have fun learning things in a more
structured way too. I think combining the strategies may also be effective: when
I get bored or stuck on a topic in the structured curriculum, move on to the
next topic and revisit it later.

I also want to focus on things outside of work and learning: keep doing yoga
daily; get outside more; go for walks during the day; read more (science?)
fiction. And take a vacation --- I don't think I've had an actual vacation since
I moved to Maine four (five?) years ago.

I am hopeful that positive societal changes will come out of our year of COVID
--- a wider acceptance of remote/wfh work (optimistic about this); better
protections for workers and the unemployed, and an overhaul of the health care
system in the US (just to name a few; I'm less optimistic about these).

Whoever is reading this --- have a happy New Year, and I hope that 2021 will be
better for you than 2020.

[^1]: I've since decided to take this site down.
