---
title: 2020 in books
date: 2021-01-31
layout: post
excerpt:
tags:
- books
---

I started working on this post a month ago, as 2020 was coming to an end, but I
never got around to finishing it. It's been a very busy month --- I've been
interviewing at a few different companies, accepting an offer from one of them,
and searching, unfruitfully, for a house and trying to prepare for that process,
when it comes, and the eventual move. So this blog has been neglected a bit.

Anyway, here are the books I read last year (and the start of this year), and my
thoughts on them, organized, loosely, in the order in which I read them.

## Books

- <b>*The Odyssey* translated by Emily Wilson</b>. Purchased near the end
  of 2019. I love this translation. It's so poetic. I've been re-reading this
  very slowly, so I still haven't finished it.
  
- <b>*Turing's Cathedral* by George Dyson</b>. I was listening to an audibook
  version in December of 2019/January of 2020. I don't remember much of it; I do
  remember having to turn it off on one drive to Massachusetts because it was
  putting me to sleep.
  
- <b>*The Information* by James Gleick</b>. A popular history of information
science. I listened to an audiobook at the beginning of the year. It was
absolutely riveting, especially after *Turing's Cathedral*, and probably the
best pop-science writing I've read. I realized this field --- information
science --- was the thing I had wanted to study in college and grad school, but
I had somehow never heard this term and I didn't know what to call it or how to
articulate what I wanted. Instead I studied "digital humanities." I never
finished this because I stopped listening to audiobooks when I stopped commuting
to work. I should buy a text copy of it to finish. Interested in reading other
works from Gleick.

- <b>*Moonwalking with Einstein* by Joshua Foer</b>. Another audiobook I
listened to in January/February that I didn't finish. The premise sounded
interesting --- a journalist spends a year training his memory in order to enter
an international memory competition --- but I found myself bored and disliking
most of the major players and wondering what the point was. I don't plan on
buying a text copy of this.

- <b>*The Well-Grounded Rubyist* by David Black</b>. I read this in the
beginning of the year. This book was a great overview of the Ruby language, and,
really, a good introduction to programming in general. Highly recommended. One
of very few programming books I read cover to cover. Could do with more
exercises, maybe.

- <b>*Practical Object-Oriented Design in Ruby* by Sandi Metz</b>. I read this
  right after *The Well-Grounded Rubyist*. It was a very quick read --- I think
  I read it over the course of a few days --- and a great introduction to
  object-oriented design and test-driven development in any language. Highly
  recommended.

- <b>*Ansible for DevOps* by Jeff Geerling</b>. I started reading this some time
in the spring and found the first couple chapters too basic, so I skipped ahead
and still felt it was too basic. Maybe I knew Ansible better than I thought? I
didn't end up finishing this, but I don't feel like I got much out of it, or
that I was going to get much more. Would be a good intro, maybe, if you had
never used Ansible before. Although the Ansible documentation is also very good,
so I'm not sure why this is needed. Maybe I will revisit it if I ever start
doing something more complicated in Ansible.

- <b>*How to Cook Everything Vegetarian* by Mark Bittman</b>. Good for learning
  basic patterns that can be adapted to cook lots of different meals. The
  recipes themselves are kind of boring.
  
- <b>*Algorithms Illuminated* by Tim Roughgarden</b>. It taught me mergesort,
  and the divide-and-conquer pattern. I got distracted by other things and never
  finished it. Should revisit this.

- <b>*Ficciones* by Jorge Luis Borges</b>. A collection of short stories by the
famous Argentine author. I purchased it in August and have been reading stories
here and there since. I finished it in January of this year. Borges has always
intrigued me and I knew the plots of many of the stories in this collection
already --- he is referenced frequently in the critical theory I read in college
and grad school --- but I'd never gotten around to reading him. The language is
erudite and the imagined book reviews can be slogs, but the high points --- *The
Garden of Forking Paths*, *Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius*, and *The Library of
Babel* --- are unforgetable.

- <b>*Programming Elixir* by Dave Thomas</b>. Purchased at the end of August.
Lots of great info here, but something about Thomas's style made it hard for me
to parse --- I often had to read sentences several times to get what he was
saying. In many cases I found the Elixir docs more lucid, but I did find the
book helpful in providing a structure through which to approach learning the
various aspects of Elixir. I've put Elixir aside for the moment so I still
haven't finished this.

- <b>*The New Media Reader* edited by Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Nick Montfort</b>.
After reading *The Information* and learning about Ted Nelson and Project Xanadu
from somewhere I wanted to read some of the essays in here, so I bought a used
copy off Amazon in September. I haven't read much of it --- "As We May Think" by
Vannevar Bush, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" by Alan Turing (a
brilliant essay), and excerpts from *Computer Lib/Dream Machines* by Ted Nelson.
Now that I think about it, that was why I bought this --- I wanted a copy of
that book, but it's out of print and used copies were going for a couple hundred
dollars on Amazon. It's a good collection but, ironically, it's the only book in
this list I had to buy in print --- I can't find a digital copy anywhere that's
not a crappy scan.

- <b>*A Systematic Course in the Ancient Tantric Techniques of Yoga and Kriya*
  by Satyananda Saraswati</b>. I'm "only" about 100 pages into this (it's a
  couple thousand, I'd guess). It's exactly what I wanted: a systematic approach
  to building a regular yoga and pranayama practice. It's great if you take the
  sections trying to clinicalize/scientize the practice with a large grain of
  salt, and skip the practices that seem questionable (like drinking salt water
  to make yourself puke).

- <b>*Dune* by Frank Herbert</b>. I started craving science fiction in October.
I used to read a lot of science fiction, but haven't in like a decade. I
downloaded a sample of *Dune* and the opening chapter, with references to the
Butlerian Jihad's destruction of "intelligent machines" and painful tests to
determine if one is human, had me hooked. I think I was also watching a lot of
Rob Miles' AI safety videos on YouTube at this time. It was an epic book.

- <b>*The Mind Illuminated* by Culadasa</b>. I actually purchased this years
  ago, when I was living in Urbana. Probably 2015. I re-read the first few
  chapters in October or November to get back into a meditation practice.

- <b>*The Dispossessed* by Ursula K. LeGuin</b>. I read this in December after
*Dune*, wanting another sci-fi fix. The first couple chapters dragged but once I
got through them it was a very quick read, and I couldn't put it down. It was a
beautiful look at what it means and takes to be free. When I was in college I
presented at a conference in Portland, OR. LeGuin was the headlining speaker,
but I was unfamiliar with her work so I skipped her talk to see Richard Hell
read from his new book at Powell's. I regret that choice now --- looking forward
to reading more from her (and less from Hell).
