---
title: Adding a NAS to my home network
date: 2021-04-03
layout: post
excerpt:
tags:
- home_network
- sysadmin
---

In October I [built myself a desktop computer]({% post_url 2020-10-11-catch-up %} "muumu.us - Catching up in October"). With the new computer, I needed to change how I stored and accessed my local data. For the past few years, I've had most of my data on a single personal laptop, a Thinkpad T460, backed up to a Raspberry Pi with an external drive using [Borg Backup](https://www.borgbackup.org/ "Borg Backup"). I also had a MacBook Pro that I won in a giveaway at work a couple years ago, which I only use to record music, and a separate work laptop, but neither of those needed access to my personal data, e.g. my notes and personal writings, financial data, etc. And since the laptop was portable, if I ever left for an extended period I'd take it with me and have access locally to all my data. Now, though, the desktop is my primary computer, but I still do use the laptop frequently for its portability --- in the kitchen, on the couch, etc.

Before I even built the desktop I knew I was going to need a way to share data between it and my laptop. I wanted to avoid a network share because I wanted to be able to have the data locally on my laptop if I ever left my house again (this was during the height of the pandemic, when I hadn't gone further than the grocery store in almost a year). I also wanted to avoid cloud services and host something myself instead, because some of this data is sensitive. When I was in grad school I ran a NextCloud instance, but that seemed like overkill for what I needed here. NextCloud is like a complete self-hosted cloud ecosystem --- I just wanted a way to sync files between the computers. So I landed on [Syncthing](https://syncthing.net/ "Syncthing").

Syncthing seemed like a cool project --- open source, peer-to-peer file syncing. The install and setup was quick and painless, and the UI was modern and easy to use. And it even had an Android client so I could sync stuff to my phone! But I quickly realized that I didn't think this all the way through --- a peer-to-peer sync protocol can't really work well if the two devices you're syncing suspend when they're not in use. The desktop and the laptop are rarely online at the same time, so they rarely have an opportunity to sync. To fix that, I installed the Syncthing client on my Raspberry Pi, too. Since the Pi is always on, I intended it to act as a kind of server between laptop and the desktop, the one peer that's always on and --- should --- always be up to date.

That never really worked well. Syncthing taxed the Pi; it crashed often, and I would see out of date files in the Syncthing web UI --- on all the devices --- that just never caught up. Eventually, a few weekends ago, it came to bite me when my GnuCash register was overwritten by an older version from my laptop. I was able to restore it from a backup, but it was the final proof that Syncthing just wasn't the right solution to my problem.

I started looking for an alternative solution.

In the past, I did run an NFS server off the Pi to share music, movies, and TV shows on the network. We used to have an app on our FireTV to watch things off the NFS server, but after it died we replaced it with a Roku and have just been using streaming services since --- I don't even remember trying to see if I could connect to the NFS share from the Roku.
