---
title: needs a title
date: 2020-10-19
layout: post
excerpt:
tags:
- health
- behcets
---

I've spent the last couple weeks doing medical things. I was diagnosed with [Behçet's disease](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beh%C3%A7et%27s_disease "Behçet's disease - Wikipedia") a few years ago, an autoimmune inflammatory condition affecting the vascular system, which causes issues like [uveitis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uveitis "Uveitis - Wikipedia"), joint and muscle pain, mouth ulcers, and skin lesions. It's been treated with monthly infusions of [Remicade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infliximab "Infliximab - Wikipedia") for the past two years, which has alleviated almost all of my symptoms for the price of something like $25,000 billed to my insurance per infusion.[^1]

I'd been sick since high school but my symptoms were either never taken seriously or never connected together. It wasn't until my late twenties when I woke up one morning blind in one eye that I was diagnosed. I was prescribed prednisone then, and for the first time in a decade I felt normal, with no pain and a noticable new clarity in my thoughts. I'd forgotten what it was like to feel healthy. I went through a few separate rounds of steroid treatments but my flares kept returning, so eventually I was moved to Remicade and [azathioprine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azathioprine "Azathioprine - Wikipedia").

The last the couple years, with the Remicade infusions, I've been in mostly complete remission and symptom free. In July, after two years without any major flares and with no visible inflammation in my retinas or ocular nerves, my rheumatologist, ophthalmologist, and I decided to try tapering off the Remicade, lowering my dosage by a third, from 600 mg to 400 mg. I had two infusions at the lower dosage, one in July and one in August, before my symptoms started flaring up badly again. It was a sobering reminder that I am [still ill](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=na1N4glBjWo "The Smiths - Still Ill (Derby Assembly Rooms, Dec 7th 1983) - YouTube") and shouldn't take my health for granted just because I currently have access to medications that make things okay. I have been feeling well again the past month or so since increasing my dosage back to 600 mg.

In the past couple weeks I've had a Remicade infusion in a new infusion center, traveled to Boston to see my ophthalmologist, saw my rheumatologist, had a physical, got an influenza vaccine, and had blood drawn. In a week I have an annual visit with a pulmonologist. I also turned 31 last week, and there's a global pandemic with new cases trending upwards since July. It's all put me in a bit of a pensive mood, thinking a lot about my health, and the health of my loved ones, and how fragile it is, and trying to accept that.

I can't have complete control over my health, but there *are* things I can do to influence it in the direction I want. In the past few years I've found a love of running. I also started practicing yoga at the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak as a way to destress 

There's been a lot of stuff about Wim Hoff posted on Hacker News lately, probably because he has a new book coming out tomorrow. 

## Footnotes

[^1]: In 2013, 9.4% of Johnson & Johnson's revenue came from Remicade, per their [SEC annual report](https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/200406/000020040614000033/a2013122910-k.htm "ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 - Johnson & Johnson - 2013-12-29").
